about safer galaxies quasars and blazars
the picture that we see here on the
title slide is of a
fairly ordinary looking spiral galaxy
with a ring of dirty dusty material
around its middle
but something strange is happening in
the center and it's creating two huge
uh
lobes bubbles
uh out above and below the normal plane
of the galaxy it's almost as if a jet of
material is shooting out and dumping gas
and dust out into these two great
bubbles above and below
and this is a safer galaxy they were
originally noted for being much brighter
and having brighter nuclei right in the
center
so what do we know about them well
they're strong radio sources in fact the
image that we've got here is of the same
galaxy center
centaurus a
and
it's a composite vid uh picture of both
optical light and radio emissions the
purple and green lobes there are the
radio emissions
and the first notice has been very very
powerful radio sources coming from
somewhere in the middle of these
galaxies
and it represents about 10 of all of the
galaxies in the nearby part of the
universe
so what we think is going on is that we
have these very active galactic nuclei
producing this high energy emissions
and these jets that sweep out
and spin around
filling these great bubbles of material
above and below the galactic plane
and the theory goes that they are
powered by a central supermassive black
hole
so here's an artist's impression of what
that
massive black hole might look like
there's a disc of material spiraling in
towards the black hole under its uh
influence of the immensely strong
gravity
being pulled in and accelerated
friction in the disk of particles
bumping into each other heats the
material up to very high temperatures
and when we're talking 700 000 degrees
kelvin
maybe a million degrees right towards
the uh inner part of the ring
but of course eventually the material
falls down inside the black hole and
vanishes and disappears so we don't see
any light from that little tiny central
disk that's where the black hole sits
above and below the plane we see jets of
material emerging
and these are controlled by magnetic
fields the idea goes that the very fast
rotation combined with the fact that the
material that's falling in at these very
high temperatures is actually a fully
ionized plasma of charged particles
and the magnetic field plus charged
particles leads to the spiraling of the
particles around the magnetic fields and
they then create their own
self-magnetic field as a result of
movement
and so you get a very complicated
interaction that leads to these fields
being twisted into a very very narrow
jet that emerges from the
rotation poles the magnetic poles of the
black hole
i say emerges from the black hole it's
coming from just near the black hole but
not inside it nothing can come out of a
black hole the jets emerge
from the accretion disk just outside the
black hole
and as a result of this we say that
these black holes are like very messy
eaters quite a large fraction of what is
trying to fall in
ends up being spewed out
along the line of the two jets
and the particles that come out along
these jets can be moving at very high
speeds up to
a goodly fraction of the speed of light
in fact our milky way
shown here the horizontal plane of the
milky way with its central bulge and the
two purple and blue
lobes above and below the galactic plane
are where
our central supermassive black hole
was feeding on material about six
million years ago
so our very early human ancestors may
have witnessed quite a light show
while the black hole was
feeding voraciously and creating jets
out of the north and south galactic
plain which would have filled these
lobes with the very hot gas that we now
detect by the residual gamma ray and
x-ray emissions
and
the uh
in that way our galaxy would have been a
safer galaxy during that period when it
was uh erupting and so galaxies can
become safer galaxies and then go quiet
again and then if more material starts
to fall into the black hole it can
become active again
the second type of object that we're
going to talk about here is an object
called a quasar
and these were discovered in the late
1950s as a result of the third cambridge
radio survey
the big survey of the uh radio objects
in the sky
and a number of bright radio sources
were found the image here is of 3c 48
in the false color picture on the right
hand side
but to begin with there was no
corresponding optical source
of light associated with these bright
but relatively small radio
structures in the sky
what was interesting about them was that
they were found to cover the whole of
the sky
um
not constrained at all to the galactic
plane of the milky way and this
suggested they were a very long way away
uncorrelated to the uh our galaxy just
out there in deep space perhaps
associated with other distant galaxies
and they were given the name quasar
short for queasy stellar radio source
the radio source is obvious a quasi
stellar because
the
more they were investigated the more it
was realized they were very very small
indeed
so almost point like
as is the case for stars of course
now this is the uh level
telescope up at jodrell bank it's a
lovely picture there with the cows in
the foreground
and the level telescope along with a
number of others were linked together to
make a powerful interferometer
joining this radio signals from multiple
dishes at different sites to get enough
very high resolution
and this revealed just how small these
um
compact
quasars
actually were
a lucky coincidence in 1962 saw another
of the most
famous quasars 3c 273
go behind the moon and the moon occulted
it and occultation is when uh some
solar system body like the moon or a
planet passes in front of a distant star
or galaxy or perhaps another planet
and blocks the light from it
and that when this happens and it
happened several times for 3c 273 in
the
timing of the loss of signal
and the known position of the moon
allowed astronomers to work out
very precisely
on the sky
where this object was
and it led to it being tracked down
martin schmidt used the 200-inch paloma
telescope and revealed a star-like
object
uh you can see it on the discovery image
down there there's a little ring around
it here so it's the tiny dot in the
center looks like a very faint star
and that's the quasar 3c 273 discovered
optically for the first time
and so martin schmidt actually made
himself quite a name for this discovery
it made it onto the front cover of time
magazine
let's open the door to studying it with
optical telescopes
and the first thing that was noted was
the spectrum was very peculiar
had a number of lines in it but
initially people couldn't recognize what
uh the
um
lines were trying to tell us that you
normally identify the different elements
that are associated with the different
lines
but it turned out that they were in fact
hydrogen the simplest element of all
but
they were shifted to the red end of the
spectrum so far that people weren't
recognizing the patterns
um 15.8 percent shift in the case of 3c
273.
now a redshift like that is caused by
the fact that the object is being
carried away from us by the expansion of
the universe the hubble expansion
and 15.8 percent
for 3c 273 corresponds to quite a high
speed 47 000 kilometers per second
but for 3c48 it was an even higher speed
and worked out to be 37
of the speed of light
now you can use hubble's law which
tells us that the speed that we observe
is directly related to the distance away
that the object is
what's what led to the discovery that
the universe was expanding
and so we can associate a distance with
these objects and these huge redshifts
put them at immense distances
they were some of the most distant
objects known
um this particular quasar which i won't
read out its catalog number at the top
there
was proven to be nine billion light
years away
and so the light had been traveling for
two-thirds of the age of the universe
before it reached our cameras
now to be visible at such a distance
uh with the brightness that they have
they have to be incredibly powerful
and of course the other thing is that
they also have to be putting out very
high energy radiation because the normal
visible light
will have been shifted way down into the
infrared so to see it invisible what
we're looking at is ultraviolet or even
x-rays that were emitted and have been
shifted down into the visible band
it was also detected that these things
were flickering and changing their
brightness slightly
and rapid
changes in brightness can only occur on
an object
um
smaller than a certain physical size
limit let's just have a look at the idea
for the sun for a moment
so if the sun were to change its
brightness then
an effect whatever the causes starting
from the center of the sun's disk
can only propagate outwards and raise
the
brightness
as a wave of information saying now
would be a good time to to
have a flash of light
propagates across the disk at the speed
of light and so if we look at the radius
of the sun
we can say that the
time delay
for different parts of the sun all
waking up to some stimulus
is going to be at least the radius
divided by the speed of light
you can do that and you get a figure of
seconds
so
for the sun a global change in
brightness triggered by
some event
would only be able to flicker
no faster than once every 2.3 seconds
now for the quasars we noticed that they
were flickering on timescales more like
hours
and so their size is light hours across
and that's uh means that they are
roughly the size of the solar system it
takes a few hours for light to travel
from the sun out to the outer planets
and as observations got better
these very small very bright
immensely powerful objects were noted to
have jets
and the radio astronomers and the
optical astronomers both
started to discover that what was really
going on there was there was a central
object
firing jets out and creating two
enormous
radio emitter lobes
so that we were getting hot x-rays and
ultraviolet light from the central
region and x-rays from the two uh ends
of the two jets
and this solves the issue of what
quasars really are they're just actually
safer galaxies
in the early universe
they're very powerful ones perhaps where
the supermassive black holes are feeding
very voraciously but the mechanism is in
fact the same
and for the third type of object that uh
as mentioned in the title of this talk a
blazer
actually this is just a quasar where the
jet is pointing straight at us so we're
looking down the gun barrel of the jet
it's coming straight towards us and so
we see the immensely powerful bright
radiation from the jet coming straight
at us rather than side on
and of course that jet can be full of
high energy particles
uh neutrinos
gamma rays all sorts of things
and we can we've detected all of those
coming from these jets all the way
across large slices of the universe
now being so far away and so bright
these quasars sometimes
line up by sheer chance with a
foreground object
and this provides a great test of
einstein's theory of general relativity
his explanation for gravity
um here's a case in point we have a
foreground galaxy a giant elliptical
galaxy that is distorting space-time
around it
and
four separate images of the distant
quasar
are appearing
each with a different path length so the
light from the quasar has traveled a
slightly different route and taken a
slightly different time to arrive
and created four separate images as it's
been split and bent by the curvature of
space-time around the intervening galaxy
and what's interesting about this is
that when we look at this
in the time domain we look at the signal
changing over time we can see
that
patterns of flickering
in one or other of the images will occur
in the next one and the next one and the
fourth one at the time intervals
corresponding to the different light
travel times along the different lengths
of path so we know absolutely it isn't
for four objects it's one object because
the uh flickering provides a fingerprint
that uh over time tells us that these
are the same object being seen more than
once this has
enabled us to very closely
test einstein's theories
we can also use quasars to perform a ct
scan of the universe
the quasar puts out its light
and as the light beam travels towards us
it goes through a number of different
layers of intervening dust and gas
and every time it does so that
intervening
material will stamp into the
spectrum the lines for its absorption
characteristics for the different
elements particularly the
lime and alpha hydrogen lines
but
as the uh
beam of light then continues on its way
towards us it's gradually getting
red-shifted more and more due to the
expansion of the universe along its
journey
and so
each cloud of dust that it um
passes through ends up taking a bite
out of it
and then those lines get shifted further
and further into the red so the most
shifted ones are the ones from earliest
in the journey until the nearby clouds
see almost no redshift at all and are at
the natural frequency of the lion and
alpha lines
and so we get a complex fingerprint and
we've got two here
3c273 which is at a redshift of just
0.158 which is relatively close by
and it has the
classic quasar shape with a
spike in the spectrum and then a few
clean lines for the
lion and alpha absorption
in there
whereas this other quasar that is much
more distant with a z of 3.62
the lyman alpha lines are an absolute
forest of uh information and we've seen
that it's passed through many different
clouds with many different redshifts and
if we're very careful we can decipher
all of this and work out the density of
the material at different distances all
the way along its line of sight
and that provides an excellent way of
mapping the large-scale structure of the
universe because we can do this for
hundreds of different lines of sight for
hundreds of different quasars
and another key fact that quasars
revealed to us
is that
they were very common in the early
universe and nowadays we really don't
see very many
uh this is presumably because when
galaxies were forming
material was flowing around rather
chaotically
and therefore tended to fall into the
clutches of the supermassive black hole
and feed it
on a very regular basis so a continuous
flow of material leading to a very high
power output
for the accretion disk and the jets
but then as the universe gradually uh
settled down
such cases have faded away and many of
the supermassive black holes now have
consumed all the material that's
anywhere within their grasp
and become quiescent
the importance of this
is that
fred hoyle's steady state theory
predicted that the universe would
be
more or less
the same
looking
at different times
the idea was that
as
galaxies moved apart from each other new
material would form in the gaps
and they would
remain equally dense and the universe
would look more or less the same at any
given epoch
well
the story with quasars shows that's just
not right and rather
puts a nail in the coffin of the steady
state theory
another feature that we we notice about
the early universe when we've done our
ct scan of it we find that
there's
hot gas and material
along lots and lots of filaments that
join up to form an immense cosmic web
many many millions of light years along
these
threads of material where there's an a
high density of
matter and where galaxies tend to form
because
they condense out of this
more dense regions with these huge
bubble-like voids in between
so this cosmic web has been mapped using
quasars
but what we realize is that
let me just zoom this up for you
along the pathways laid out by the
cosmic webs i've marked in
a lot of the
safer galaxies and quasars that we know
about
with a little bar indicating their spin
axis that's indicating where their jets
are coming out
and they are more or less aligned
in most cases with the
linear geometry of the cosmic web
and this is
suggesting that there's a causal
relationship between them
and of course it's highly probable that
the
rotation of the random rotation of
material
uh leads to one and
predominant spin axis
in various different regions of space
and it's that that creates the
filamentary structure and of course
leads to the
dominant spin for the galaxy and the
supermassive black hole and therefore
the spin axis is aligned along these
threads
so a fascinating recent result that one
okay well i'll bring that talk to a
close now and thank you very much for
listening